
CHAPTER 3 | COMPREHENSION 33

Induced Imagery Procedure The induced imagery procedure can be used with students who are struggling with comprehension and need support with the strategy of visualizing. While reading independently, this procedure requires students to list key words about a story element (e.g., setting, character, problem, solution, plot, etc.). Then, using the key words, students visualize a scene from the text and draw a picture of what they visualized. Students must also write a paragraph describing the scene they drew. Here are the steps to follow to implement this procedure:

1. Provide students with a sticky note to record key words. Direct them to the story element they should focus on, such as the setting of the story. As they read the text, they record any key words or phrases that relate to the setting on the sticky note.

2. Using the key words recorded on the sticky note, the students draw a picture of what their notes help them visualize.

3. The students write a description of the picture they drew and explain why they drew the various details in the picture. Encourage the students to refer to details from their sticky note (Tierney & Readence, 2004).

4. The students reflect on how the procedure was used to support comprehension.

Generative-Reciprocal Inference Procedure (GRIP) The generative-reciprocal inference procedure (GRIP) supports students who need to develop their overall comprehension as well as learn to make inferences. GRIP requires the students to analyze a text and make inferences. Then, students must generate their own short text for a peer to read to continue to practice making inferences. Here are the steps for this procedure:

1. Provide students with a T-chart, with the left column labeled “Inference” and the right column labeled “Evidence.”

2. Have the students read a text and record key details in the “Evidence” column that relate to a particular story element (e.g., setting, character, plot, problem, solution, etc.). After reviewing the “Evidence” column, the students should record their inference in the “Inference” column. The goal is to align the inference made with details provided in the text. Table 3.5 offers an example of how this T-chart might look.