
CHAPTER 4 Writing NOTES FROM THE FIELD ...

One year I was working to prepare my fifth-grade students for a social studies state test. One of the practice test questions was a document-based question (DBQ) about the women’s rights movement. We went through the same template and procedures that I have worked on with the class in the past when preparing for such a test question. Later, when I read the responses from one of my students, I was intrigued. Niesha was a pretty popular girl in the class. She was always positive and never really seemed to need teacher support on a social level. Her DBQ addressed the issue of sexism with regard to the women’s right’s movement. But that’s not what stood out to me. In the margin on her written work, Niesha drew a sketch. I’ve seen similar sketches before from students when they finished early and simply doodled on the paper. Niesha’s sketch was different. It was a sketch of a scene from her own life—she was on the playground and was being told she could not play basketball because she was a girl. This was a learning moment for me. While the test prep was useful for my students, it seemed that the true purpose of writing was lost. It was then that I realized how essential it is to ensure that such connections to writing, such as Niesha’s critique of sexism, have an outlet.

INTRODUCTION: WRITING AND LITERACY In Chapter 3, we explored the various aspects of reading comprehension and methods for meeting the comprehension needs of students in our classrooms. In this chapter,

36
CHAPTER 4 | WRITING 37

we will focus on writing methods and how to use this component of literacy in an interdisciplinary and purposeful manner.

WRITING FOR A PURPOSE Writing is inextricably connected to reading. Writing should have a clear purpose that goes beyond the curriculum and connects to students’ lives. Such connections promote engagement and set the stage for writing for a purpose.

The Three Purposes of Writing Typically, we ask students to write for the following three purposes: to entertain, persuade, and inform. Table 4.1 explains each purpose for writing. Although there are three distinct purposes for writing, a single piece of writing may

be written for more than one purpose. For instance, suppose I wrote an expository piece about a famous actor. In this piece, I inform the reader about this person’s early life before pursing acting. Then, I end the piece by attempting to persuade the reader that this person should not have taken this course of action. A piece like this is written to both inform and persuade. Thus, it is important to remain flexible when planning your writing curriculum and teach students about the purposes for writing that may relate to the genre.

Table 4.1 The Three Purposes of Writing PURPOSE

DEFINITION Entertain

Students create a written piece for the purpose of entertaining the reader. This can be in any genre and can promote a variety of feelings, such as humor, confusion, shock, fear, etc.

Persuade

Students create a persuasive piece of writing to convince the reader to do or feel something. This can also be in any genre, though expository texts are usually used for this purpose.

Inform

Students create this piece of writing to inform the reader about a topic.

ExAMPLES

a fictional story with a twist ending, a funny poem about the first day of school, a riddle or puzzle, etc.

an essay about global warming, a poster to encourage social action, etc.

narrative about a famous scientist, a play that teaches about an event in history, a research paper about the president, etc.
38 LITERACY IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION, GRADES 3–6

Personal Connections Think back to Niesha’s sketch in the margin of her paper. An important element to consider is using writing as an outlet for self-expression. Personal connections can be considered a fourth purpose of writing. As you learn about your students and their interests, think about ways to build

a writing curriculum that is responsive. For example, after finding Niesha’s sketch, I was able to incorporate her ideas into an upcoming persuasive writing unit. For the persuasive writing unit, students selected a topic that was important to them and their community. This is preferable to simply having the entire class write about a generic topic that they may not have a personal connection to. Here are some topics the fifth graders came up with that they witnessed in their community: child abuse, animal abuse and dog fighting, state testing, and sexism. Students used the persuasive writing unit in a way that permitted them to make personal connections and the unit was essential to them meeting their learning goals for this genre of writing. Thus, in addition to writing to entertain, inform, and persuade, be sure to instill the idea that writing to explore personal connections is also important. Here are some examples of other ways you can make personal connections with a traditional writing curriculum:

• Write a poem about one’s cultural background(s). • Write a how-to book about a favorite activity. • Write a narrative story based on a real event. • Write a persuasive essay convincing the reader to purchase a favorite toy or game.

THE WRITING PROCESS When planning how to implement your writing curriculum, make certain that students have a basic understanding of the writing process. The writing process includes the steps a writer takes from starting a writing piece to completing it. Although the process is outlined below, it is not linear. Students may need to go back or move forward a step depending on their needs or preferences as writers, the genre they are writing in, and their thinking processes. For each piece of writing a student creates, all of the phases of the writing process are typically followed, with the exception of the final phase.

Phase One: Brainstorm and Organize

BRAINSTORM In this initial phase of the writing process, students gather topics to write about that connect to the task you present them. It is recommended that you provide the students
CHAPTER 4 | WRITING 39

plenty of classroom discussions before asking them to brainstorm. You should also set a purpose for brainstorming. For example, avoid giving students vague writing topics, such as “Write about what you did this summer.” Such a topic can be too opened-ended and cause difficulty when it is time to organize ideas. Instead, offer more specific directions, such as “What did you do this summer to prepare for the first day of school?” When students are asked to brainstorm, provide them with a graphic aid, such Table 4.2. In the brainstorming chart, show the student how to collect their ideas. You want this part of the writing process to involve as little writing as possible. In the chart below, students list potential ideas to write about as brief sketches and/or words or phrases.

Table 4.2 My Brainstorming Menu

ORGANIZE Now that ideas have been gathered, the next step is to briefly organize ideas before writing. In this latter part of phase one, it is a good idea for students to talk to someone (peers or the teacher) about their topic. Then they should plan out the order in which they intend to write about their ideas. There are various ways to help students organize their ideas. If your students prefer to visually see how their ideas will progress, then a graphic organizer such as the one in Table 4.3 is useful.

Table 4.3 Sample Graphic Organizer Beginning

Middle End
40 LITERACY IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION, GRADES 3–6

Table 4.4 Sample Outline A. Introduction a.

What is the Civil War?

b. When did the Civil War occur? c.

Why is this important?

B. Causes of the Civil War a.

North vs. South b. President C.

Results of the Civil War a.

Political Impact D.

b. Social Impact Conclusion

However, if your students prefer to create a brief outline of their writing, then an

outline such as the one in Table 4.4 may be beneficial. The way students choose to organize their ideas will depend on the genre. For example,

organizing ideas for a poem about nature may be different than organizing ideas for an essay on the Civil War. Because students may have different preferences when it comes to this phase of writing, it is recommended that you model various methods of organizing ideas and allow students to select a method that works best for them.

Phase Two: Draft This phase of writing allows students to take the ideas they gathered and organized in phase one and create a draft of the writing piece. When students are writing their draft, encourage them to focus on the content of the work, instead of attending to grammar, spelling, or punctuation. These aspects of the writing piece can often impede the natural flow of ideas. It will also be a focus in the next phase of writing. These issues, if there are any, will inevitably be addressed. In the drafting phase, promote the use of the materials created in phase one. Students

may go back and make changes to the organization of the writing piece or may decide to keep it as it is. The overall goal of this stage is to get ideas written down (digitally or on paper).

Phase Three: Edit and Revise In the third phase of writing, students examine the piece they completed in the drafting stage. As students are working on editing and revising their writing pieces, you may want
CHAPTER 4 | WRITING 41

to create a kid-friendly checklist to help guide students through editing and revising their work.

EDIT When students edit a work sample, they make changes to spelling, grammar, and/or mechanics to improve the readability of the text. The items that you will ask students to edit will vary by grade level and writing ability. For instance, you may ask a third-grade student to edit for commas. Or you may ask a fifth-grade student to edit for italics and quotation marks. Be sure to consult grade-level standards to determine what your editing expectations should be. After you have established the items your students will need to edit, create a student-friendly checklist, as shown in Table 4.5, to guide students through the steps of editing.

Table 4.5 Sample Editing Checklist □ Did I spell my words correctly? □ Did I check to see if my subjects and verbs matched? □ Did I use periods at the end of each sentence? □ Did I use a capital letter at the beginning of each sentence and for proper nouns?

REVISE When students revise a work sample, they add or remove text to accomplish the following:

• add or delete vocabulary words • add or delete new phrases or sentences • move phrases or sentences around

Students make such changes to improve the reader’s comprehension of the work

sample and the clarity of the intended message or purpose. As with editing, you can provide a student-friendly revising checklist as a guide. The items included on this checklist will depend on the standards for the grade level. Table 4.6 offers an example of a revising checklist. As already mentioned, the way students edit and revise will depend on their grade

level and the standards you select to inform your writing curriculum. However, it is necessary that you model each component of editing and revising. The simplest way to do this is to create a teacher work sample. Use this work sample to model for the students
42 LITERACY IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION, GRADES 3–6

how to edit and revise a text. It is recommended that you offer practice using both print and digital mediums throughout the school year. When having students edit and revise their work, you want to offer options for how

this can be done. At times, students should complete this process independently. This will allow you to assess their ability to edit and revise. At other times, you want to permit students to work with others to edit and revise. This can be with a peer at a similar writing level, a small group of students with similar writing levels, or one-on-one with the teacher. This promotes collaboration within the classroom and offers students much-needed support.

Table 4.6 Sample Revising Checklist □ Do I need to change any words? □ Does the text say what I want it to say? □ Are there any parts that may be confusing to the reader?

Phase Four: Publish (Optional) This is the final phase of the writing process. In the publishing phase of writing, students take the changes they made in phase three and create a finished product. The finished product will look different for different genres. Here are some elements you may wish to have students include in their finished products:

• cover page • table of contents • images

This final phase is optional. Not all writing pieces need to be published. The decision

to publish a piece should be left up to the students. You can recommend that they select their “best works,” or perhaps their favorite pieces from the unit, as items to publish. It is important that you focus on the students’ strengths when they select an item to publish.

DETERMINING STRENGTHS AND AREAS OF NEED IN WRITING In Chapters 2 and 3, the importance of examining students’ strengths and areas of need when planning for reading instruction was discussed. The same is true when planning for writing instruction. This will help you select the best possible areas to focus on for your class.
CHAPTER 4 | WRITING 43

Before teaching a new writing unit, get into the practice of planning pre-assessments for each writing unit. Table 4.7 lists the areas to focus on when planning a pre-assessment.

Table 4.7 Areas for a Writing Pre-Assessment AREA

Focus Organization Development

Language Mechanics

vocabulary DESCRIPTION Does the writer stick to the topic?

Does the writer organize details in a way that allows the reader to make sense of the text?

Does the writer offer sufficient details that contribute to the readability of the text?

Does the writer follow the grammatical rules of English? Does the writer follow the mechanical rules of English?

Does the writer use descriptive words and grade-level vocabulary?

Table 4.8 Writing Assessment Tally Chart AREAS

Focus Organization Development

Language and Mechanical Conventions

vocabulary PRE-ASSESSMENT NEEDS POST-ASSESSMENT NEEDS
44 LITERACY IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION, GRADES 3–6 The areas listed in Table 4.7 will differ depending on the grade level. When planning a

pre-assessment, be sure to consider the overall goals of the writing unit. The pre-assessment should be aligned with these goals. After you collect and review pre-assessments, keep a tally of which of the areas are the greatest areas of need. Table 4.8 shows a simple example of how to keep track of pre-assessment data. Table 4.8 will allow you to examine your pre-assessment data and determine

what your lessons in the writing unit should focus on. For instance, suppose the students had several errors in the areas of focus and organization, yet very few had trouble with vocabulary. Instead of following the writing curriculum provided by your school, you can make modifications to focus on the classes’ areas of need. This will allow your instruction to be more focused and address the issues you noticed in the brief data analysis you conducted. Using a chart like the one in Table 4.8 is intended to provide you with data to plan the upcoming unit quickly. Keeping simple checkmarks or tallies is sufficient to get an overview of how the class is performing within this genre. At the end of the unit, you should give a post-assessment. It is helpful for the post-assessment to align closely with the pre-assessment. The reason this alignment is essential is that it will allow you to measure growth at the conclusion of the writing unit. The post-assessment data will also allow you to see how impactful some instructional methods were. Refer back to Table 4.8. You should notice fewer checkmarks in the post-assessment column compared to the pre-assessment column. Any lingering tallies in the post-assessment column will give you a general overview of the needs of the whole class that are likely to trickle into the following writing unit. When looking at the pre-assessment and post-assessment data, it is realistic to still see tallies appear in both columns. You should not seek to eliminate all of tallies that you see. Instead, use this information to make decisions about your teaching. Writers in your class will always demonstrate strengths and areas of need throughout the school year. The next section provides examples of how you can structure the writing period.

WRITING INSTRUCTIONAL METHODS When planning a writing unit, it is important to encourage students to work through the phases of the writing process regardless of the genre. The sections below describe ways to set up a typical writing unit.

Daily Writing Lessons Each day, it is recommended that you teach a daily writing lesson. In the first few lessons in the unit, students should explicitly work through the writing process. This should take the first few days of the unit, but the length of time will depend on the needs of
CHAPTER 4 | WRITING 45

the students in your class. Model for the students each step in the writing process as previously described. Then have the students practice this on their own. Table 4.9 outlines how to structure your daily writing lessons.

Writing Groups In addition to a daily writing lesson, work with students in small writing groups. These groups can meet when the whole class is working independently, after the daily writing lesson. It is recommended that you begin meeting with these groups after you have gone through the entire writing process with the class (on Day 7 or afterward, as shown in Table 4.9). Be sure to consider the following tips when planning to work with small writing groups:

• Use the data you gathered from the pre-assessment (see Table 4.8) or other teacher observations to determine who will be in each writing group. Students should be grouped by writing level or areas of need.

• Limit each writing group to no more than six students to make the work manageable.

• Be willing to move students around if you notice commonalities in areas to work on or if you notice that a student no longer needs support in a particular area.

• Keep the writing groups’ daily goals as specific as possible. For example, the writing group goal of “editing” may be too broad, whereas “editing for capital letters” is more specific.

The goal of working with the writing groups is to allow the teacher to offer more

individualized support, in addition to teaching the whole-class lesson. The goals of the writing groups and the group members can change daily. For example, you may have planned to work on “editing with capital letters” with a group of four students. Then you notice that two additional students also need to work on this area. If possible, pull these two students into your writing group, as they are demonstrating the same area of need. Writing groups require flexibility. However, you want to make sure you get to include all of the students in small groups as much as possible. Table 4.10 displays how you can structure your small writing groups.
46 LITERACY IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION, GRADES 3–6

Table 4.9 Sample Structure of a Writing Unit DAY 1:

DAY 2: BRAINSTORM • Model how to

come up with ideas that align with the genre.

• List your ideas on a chart.

• Students discuss and share their own ideas with the whole class.

• Give the students the same chart that you used and have them list their own ideas for the unit.

ORGANIZE

• Model how to organize ideas in a graphic organizer.

• Students talk with a partner about how they can organize their ideas.

• Provide the students with the same graphic organizer and have them independently organize their ideas before writing.

* These parts of the writing process may take more than two days.

DAYS 3 AND 4: DRAFT*

• Model how to turn the ideas gathered in a graphic organizer into a draft.

• Students work on

getting their ideas down in a draft.

DAYS 4 AND 5: EDIT AND REVISE*

• Model how to read a draft and edit/revise.

• Students have discussions about how they will edit and revise.

• Students edit and revise their own pieces independently.

DAY 6: PUBLISH

• Explain how to turn a draft into a published piece.

• Students decide if they will publish their current piece.

DAY 7 TO END OF UNIT

• The remainder of the writing unit should be used to address the areas of need that were determined when you analyzed the pre-assessment data (in Table 4.8).
CHAPTER 4 | WRITING 47

Table 4.10 Sample Small Writing Group Structure Introduction

Model

Introduce the writing group’s goal of the day (e.g., working on the rules for using commas).

Conduct a brief re-teach lesson (e.g., describe the rules of using commas and offer examples).

Students talk about the lesson’s goals. Student Practice

Students work with a partner to answer some questions you pose. With teacher support, students review writing pieces to address the writing goal.

Closure

Students share how they addressed the writing goal and discuss why the goal is important to their writing.

For each writing group, you can keep informal notes on what you noticed with

regard to the students’ strengths and areas of need. Along with the data from the pre-assessments and teacher observations, you can use these notes to determine what the goals for the next writing group will be. Writing groups are a quick and informal way for you to offer additional support during the unit. They also allow you to informally assess the progress each student is making. This will provide valuable information when you make adjustments in your writing instructional methods.

CONCLUSION Planning a writing unit can feel like a daunting task. As with reading, careful data analysis can offer insight into how to structure your instruction. Additionally, considering the purposes for writing and encouraging students to participate in the writing process is useful when selecting your instructional methods. Chapter 5 will offer ideas on how to embed reading and writing within other subject areas as we examine how interdisciplinary literacies can be used in the classroom.
CHAPTER 5 Interdisciplinary Literacies NOTES FROM THE FIELD ...

When I first started teaching, I had my fifth graders read a social studies textbook about New York State and answer comprehension questions. This was before there was wireless internet and Smartboards in my classrooms. My intention was to expose them to some content before beginning the actual social studies lesson. However, it was quickly apparent that they struggled with reading a textbook. The textbook was below fifth-grade level (it was all we had access to). So, it was not that the level of the text did not align to their independent level. I noticed that the students primarily opened the book, read the chapter from front to back, then took out a sheet of paper to attempt to answer the comprehension questions. They did not preview the text or stop to check their understanding. And they certainly were not engaged. It was apparent that my students needed to be taught how the strategies they were learning to support their reading comprehension should be transferred to their content area learning as well.

INTRODUCTION: INTERDISCIPLINARY LITERACIES In Chapter 4, we explored the various aspects of teaching and assessing writing. In this chapter, we’ll discuss how to embed literacy within other content areas, such as science, social studies, and math. Making literacy practices interdisciplinary allows students to make a stronger connection to concepts taught and allows additional opportunities for practice.

48
CHAPTER 5 | INTERDISCIPLINARY LITERACIES 49

LITERACY IN THE CONTENT AREAS Content-area instruction often requires students to read textbooks and other nonfiction materials. Given the specific structure of this genre, it is useful to explicitly teach students specific techniques for interacting with such reading materials. The following procedures can be used in the content areas to support readers with comprehension and developing study skills:

• SQ3R • SCAN and RUN • taking notes in the margins

SQ3R (Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review) Robinson’s (1946) SQ3R procedure encourages metacognition when reading. It requires students to follow certain steps before, during, and after reading a text. Table 5.1 outlines the steps recommended by the SQ3R procedure. This procedure works best with nonfiction, textbook-type reading materials typically

used in the content areas. It is a useful method of teaching students how to implement the comprehension strategy of previewing the text and self-questioning. This technique can be completed independently or in partnerships. Using a checklist, such as the one in Table 5.2, can be a useful way to encourage students to self-monitor their progress when using the SQ3R procedure.

Table 5.1 The SQ3R Procedure Survey

Question Read Recite Review Preview the text.

Look at common text features, such as headings, bold words, images/charts, and captions.

Write a list of questions based on what you surveyed. This will help guide your reading.

Read the text and look for the answers to the questions you generated. Orally recite the possible answers to the questions you generated.

In writing, formally answer the questions you created. Then ask any remaining questions that may exist.
50 LITERACY IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION, GRADES 3–6

Table 5.2 SQ3R Checklist Before Reading ... □ Survey—Did I preview the headings, bold words, images/charts, captions, and glossary before reading?

□ Question—Did I write a list of questions I think the text will answer?

During Reading ... □ Read/Recite—Did I say aloud the possible answers to my questions?

After Reading ... □ Review—Did I write down my questions using complete sentences? Did I list any other questions I have?

SCAN and RUN Procedure Salembier’s (1999) SCAN and RUN technique is very similar to SQ3R. The SCAN and RUN procedure ensures students to implement self-monitoring strategies before and during reading. Table 5.3 lists the steps of the SCAN and RUN technique. This technique encourages metacognition as it guides students through beneficial reading

behaviors before and during reading. Using a checklist, such as the one in Table 5.4, is a useful way to keep students on track when using the SCAN and RUN technique.

Table 5.3 The SCAN and RUN Procedure SCAN: Before Reading Survey

Capture

Attack Note

Students survey, or preview, headings and turn them into questions.

Students “capture” captions and other visuals in the text and think about their meaning.

Students “attack” bold words and think about their meaning. Students “note” the end-of-chapter questions to set a purpose for reading.

RUN: During Reading Reading

Use Notice

Students adjust their reading speed, slowing down or speeding up when needed. Students use word identification skills to decode.

Students notice what parts of the reading they did or did not understand. Then they decide to reread or continue reading.
CHAPTER 5 | INTERDISCIPLINARY LITERACIES 51

Table 5.4 SCAN and RUN Checklist SCAN before reading ... □ I surveyed headings and turned them into questions. □ I captured the captions and visuals. □ I attacked boldface words. □ I noted the end-of-chapter questions. RUN during reading ... □ I adjusted my reading speed. □ I used word identification skills. □ I noticed and checked parts I didn’t understand.

Notes in the Margins In addition to teaching the SQ3R and SCAN and RUN procedures, you can also teach students basic note-taking techniques as they read in their content area texts. Teaching students how to take notes in the margins is a helpful way to encourage them to transfer reading comprehension strategies to other disciplines. When teaching students how to take notes in the margins, devise a coding system that works for your class. Table 5.5 shows some sample coding marks you can use.

Table 5.5 Sample Coding Marks for Taking Notes in the Margins MARK

MEANING + × ?

I agree with what the author writes here. I disagree with that the author writes here. I have a question about this part.

These coding marks can be a quick and easy way for students to take notes and

can change with the text or purpose for reading. It is useful to create a standard set of markings that the whole class will follow. This will allow you to easily have conversations about what students write in the margins of their texts. In addition to teaching coding marks, you can also teach students how to write very brief phrases in the margins that demonstrate their thinking. You should include this component as restricting students